I'm part of the team here at CaseCoach
and I'm a former consultant
and interviewer from Mckinsey
I'm going to be doing some
case interview videos
and these are going to be replications
of cases that look a lot like the types
of cases that you will see
in interviews for consulting firms
around the world.
Throughout the interviews I will be
interjecting some comments or thoughts
as we go.
Things that went really well and
other things that can be improved.
Enjoy the video!
- Welcome to the firm.
- Thank you, thank you for having me.
- All right so we're just
gonna start off with the case
why don't I just launch into the prompt.
- Yeah, absolutely.
- So your client in this case
is the Canadian Wildlife Federation,
otherwise known as the CWF.
This is a government affiliated
non-profit organization
which aims to educate
Canadians about wildlife
and promote responsible human
actions and conservation.
They've contacted your
firm to help them figure
why one particular endangered
species population,
the swift fox, has been
declining dramatically
and what they can do to stop
it from declining any further.
- Interesting, that's too
bad for the swift fox.
- Yeah, yeah, this sounds
like a pretty dramatic
decline in their population.
- Oh, yeah, well, that's, really too bad.
- So my question for you Scott,
is how would you think
about solving this problem?
- Great, before we dive too far,
into how we wanna think
about solving this.
I just wanna make sure
I've captured everything
and clarify a couple points before.
- Yeah, of course.
- We go too much further.
- Of course.
- So as I heard it, I'm here today
dealing with Canadian Wildlife Federation.
And they've been struggling
with a declining population
of the swift fox.
And really, we're just here
to answer what's been causing
this decline in the swift fox population.
- That's right.
- Okay, great, so just to
set a bit more context,
talking about the swift foxes.
How long is this decline been going on?
And how much of the population
has actually been lost?
- Yeah, I know, it's a fair question.
So actually, it looks like historically,
the populations have been
stable up until the last year.
- Okay.
- So it's really a very recent decline.
- Oh, wow, interesting.
That's very interesting,
do we have any numbers
as to how much this is
declined or anything like that?
- So what I've got is
that we have 5000 today.
- Okay.
- And a year ago is 6000.
- Oh, wow, okay, that's a
pretty meaningful decline.
- Yeah.
- 15, 17% let's talk about objectives
a little bit before we get
too far into this as well.
- Yep.
- Is there any sort of target level
and wanting to get the
population back to or time window
we're looking to achieve this in?
- I mean, this is less about targets
is sort of what are we gonna achieve?
- Yeah.
- And more about let's
just do what we can do
to address this decline, right?
So I don't think that they
have a target number in mind.
- Okay.
- But as soon as possible,
let's understand what's going on
and then we can move to
figuring out how to address it.
- Okay, okay, so this is
more of a diagnostic exercise
than let's get to really.
- Yeah, exactly.
- Okay, great, I think I've
got all I need right now.
If I just take a quick minute here
and structure on my thoughts.
- Perfect, please do.
How are we doing Scott?
- Doing just great, so
let me share with you
how I'm thinking about this.
- Okay.
- So the way I see it is
that in order to answer
what's been causing this
decline in fox population,
it's a matter of a formula
of three key things,
births, deaths, and what
I'm calling departures.
- Okay.
- So within births, I
really just wanna look at
how many foxes are
being born year to year.
And how is that change?
Has there been a decline in the number
of foxes being born every year?
Or is that been stable?
And then the other side
of it is the death.
So this is a subtraction
from the population.
And this I'd really looked
at it in three categories.
So deaths, natural death,
so those are associated
with just age and other factors like that.
Disease related, which, I
mean, it's self explanatory.
- Of course.
- How many deaths are related to disease.
And is there been a change in
that in the last year or so?
- Yeah.
- And the final death related
death bucket would be hunting.
So sort of the human element.
- Sure, of course.
- How many foxes are
being hunted every year?
That's a factor at all.
- My sense is that they're endangered
so that's probably not an issue.
- There is only yeah, yeah.
- And then the last one is departures.
So thinking about maybe humans
have forced them out of
their natural habitat.
And to force them somewhere else,
they're not necessarily
declining in total numbers.
They're just declining in the
region that we're looking at.
- So it's more in our counting of the ones
that are around rather than
where they're actually
declining in terms of deaths
so they're not being born as well.
- Exactly, exactly.
- That seems like a pretty
complete list Scott,
is there anything in particular
now that you would focus on?
- Yeah, so for me, the
place I'd wanna start
actually is looking at deaths.
My thinking here is around the disease
or the hunting component
in hunting, maybe less so.
But I think I wanna
focus first on disease,
especially given the timeframe
of this being just one year
and try to understand if
there's been some new disease
that's cropped up, or any other factor
that's caused an uptick
in the number of deaths.
- All right, so let's talk a little bit
about how Scott did right there.
He just shared his initial structure
and I think he did a great job.
First, he did a great job starting
with clarifying questions.
He didn't spend too long reiterating
what the case prompt was
or what the brief of the question was.
He though he checked it to make sure
that he had the right target,
he wanted to make sure
that he was aligned.
And he diagnosed the root cause
before moving towards solutions.
Got me an interview, sorry,
got me to agree with his approach,
and then went into it right?
And that's exactly what
you wanna do, right,
that first beginning
part of the case, right?
Make sure you're on the right path.
Don't spend too much time
there and then launch into it.
Yes, he could have asked
a couple more questions
about the swift fox, does
it have an unusual habitat
or characteristics?
Is it an endangered species?
Since it's the focus of this case,
maybe a little bit more information on it
could have been useful, right?
It's just a made up thing.
And so there may be some
other interesting nuggets
there that he could have
dug in a little bit on.
But this is not to say that
it wasn't a great start.
Once he got into a structure,
I thought he did a very good job.
The structure is clearly MECE right?
It's an equation, it gets us very clearly
to population growth, births, minus deaths
minus net migration.
He's focused on the right metric.
He's not just making up some framework
for no particular reason.
It's very targeted to what it
is we're trying to achieve.
And he provided great insight there
around hunting and migration.
Okay, perfect, let's jump into it.
- Let's do it.
Okay, so let's talk
first about the diseases.
So, in the past year, two years,
has there been any meaningful disease
that's appeared in swift fox population
that something we should know about?
- You know, the one
thing that I see is that
there is this deadly
gastrointestinal disease
that affected a bunch
of forests of Canada,
including the habitat of the swift fox.
- Oh, interesting.
- Now, we don't have any
data or any information
as to whether or not that's affecting
the swift fox in particular.
- Okay.
- But that type of animal seems
like it's been suffering from this thing?
- Okay, interesting, interesting.
Well, you mentioned that we
didn't have any specific data
pertaining to that.
So I'll just leave it there
as sort of a placeholder.
Something interesting to keep in mind.
So still along the
death, increasing deaths
- Yep.
- The other factor is the natural deaths.
And I'm just curious about the
the life expectancy of fox.
And if there's been any
meaningful change in that
in the recent history.
- You know, from what we see,
we don't really see any real
difference in life expectancy
in terms of what has changed
the last little while
not really no.
- Okay, so no real change.
So with that in mind it
feels to me a little bit like
deaths is not the avenue
that work in fine,
too much useful information
on at least at this point.
So I think it's time to maybe pivot
to another piece of this,
which is talking about the
number of births every year
so let's talk about
births for a little bit
if that's okay with you.
So I'm curious, how many foxes are,
excuse me how many foxes
are born every year?
How many pups can be born to
a female in their lifetime?
- That's a good question,
let me see what the facts I have here.
So, the way that they
measure these are in litters.
- Okay.
- So the average fox litter
is one and a half foxes.
- Okay.
- And that's a once yearly thing.
- Once yearly.
- Yeah.
- Okay.
Interesting, interesting and
that's per female, obviously,
it seems like a lot of
foxes, oh my goodness.
Okay, so that gives us a
sense of how many foxes
can potentially be born.
And I guess the way to
sort of quantify that
is to think about how many females
there are in this population.
Other that, and the
ones, that can be born.
So my assumption is that
of this 5000 population
that a half are females
is that a fair assumption?
- Yeah, that's fair, although
we have actually some data
that I can show you.
- Oh Okay.
- Let me show you a couple of exhibits.
- Okay.
- And I'd love to hear
what you have to say
or what you see there.
- Oh, interesting, okay,
do you mind if I just
take quick second as to.
- Sure sure, don't take too long
because I'd like to get kind of
your first impressions early on.
- Yeah, absolutely.
Okay, so what I'm seeing
here is that basically,
the fox population is
broken into four regions
split by this highway.
But the populations aren't split equally.
And it seems like there's
actually a very unbalanced
gender well, there's the
genders are not balanced,
could be lead to fewer births.
And the other piece that I'm
noticing is the incidence,
the percentage of population
that's affected by disease.
Some of them are quite meaningful.
However, at first glance, I
don't see a real correlation
with the male, female or even
the size of the population.
But this is still probably
a meaningful number
in terms of how many foxes are being
are dying to young.
- Yeah.
- But what this is really
telling me at first
is there's not enough,
there aren't enough pairs
or mating pairs to be able to potentially
replace all the foxes
that need to be replaced.
- Yep.
- And also the split in
population by this highway
might mean that migration between
to help find a mate is also not possible
because they would have
to cross the highway.
- Yeah, there seem to
be some pretty big skews
between the female and male population.
- Yeah, absolutely, absolutely.
You know, just at first glance,
without diving into too much detail,
it seems like there's
almost like a 60/40 or 65/35
type split between females versus males,
which is quite interesting.
- What do you think might be causing that?
- That's interesting, you know,
why would there be more
females than males?
My instinct would be to say
that it's sort of caused
by one of two things.
One being this diseases affecting females
more than maybe affecting males,
more than they affect females,
and the other would be some
other human related factor
like females, or excuse
me, males are being hunted
for some other specific reason
or more of a prey of some other animal.
So some other imbalance there.
However, my first
hypothesis about the diseases
doesn't seem to hold much merit
given the correlation between
the percentage of females
and percent of population
affected by disease.
- Yeah.
- Doesn't quite.
- Yeah, it doesn't seem
to be a clear line, yeah.
- So my hunch is more along
the lines of some sort
of human interference.
But that's just what would
affect the population skew.
And I think it's important
that we tie this back
to what we were initially trying
to figure out is what's
been causing this decline?
So where I'd really wanna take this next,
I think, is to look at how many
going back to my initial structure here,
thinking about how many
babies are born every year?
- Yeah.
- Minus how many are dying by
natural causes and disease,
which looks impactful?
- Yep.
- And then I can probably
remove this department
and then from this, we can
probably get a good estimate
as to how much we expect
our population to change.
- Yep.
- Or in the next year
or the years following.
- Yep.
- Does that make sense to you?
- Sure, yeah, and actually, I mean,
this lines up pretty well
for the clients interested
in knowing.
- Okay, great.
- All right, so me again, just interrupt.
Let's talk a little bit about
judgment and insights right.
So he's progressing through the case,
I'm giving him lots of leeway
to choose where to focus.
And he's doing a great
job of leading the way,
right that interviewee led approach.
When we did exhibits, right?
I shared these with Scott, he
did a very good job of drawing
the insights out of them,
commented on what he saw high level
without getting lost in the details,
and then focused only on the aspects
that could help him solve the case, right?
There's sometimes quite
a lot of noise around
Scott was very good at
targeting into the things
that were really, really important.
Using this, he came up
with a few hypothesis
that suggested he would
quantify their impact
in the next step.
So he's had, he kind of said,
oh, here's a couple of hypothesis.
We're gonna get to quantification.
He's driving me through the case,
rather than forcing me to
drive him through the case.
Overall, I think he's doing a great job.
And so what they've
asked is that they said,
you know, the entry by what
are yours you're finding
in these exhibits, and
they're really curious
how impactful both the
disease and gender disparity
have been on the overall population.
Most specifically, what
they're interested in knowing
is how much would you expect
the population decline
based on these two
issues in the next year?
- Okay, so basically, the
way I'm thinking about this
is taking it right back
to my initial structure,
but quantifying it.
- Right.
- So starting first with
the number of births
that we'd see every year
minus the number of deaths
by natural and disease.
- Yep.
- So within births, the
way I'm thinking about it
is looking at how many mating pairs
can possibly there possibly can exist,
which is based on the
fraction of the population.
- Yep.
- And I'll call it the limiting gender.
- So whichever one has
a smaller percentage,
and then going back to the how many cubs
they can have in a single litter.
So that'll give us the number of births
we can expect a year.
And then to the death side,
it's basically just a sum
of how many natural deaths
we would expect is based
on their life expectancy.
And then the disease which is again
based on the life expectancy
by those infected.
So maybe let's start first with births
and there's a couple pieces of information
that I'm gonna ask you for.
- Sure of course.
- Before we start calculating things.
So you mentioned before
that the each female fox
can expect to have 1 1/2 cubs
1 1/2 pups
- Yeah.
- per year.
- Yeah, it's about the time analogy is,
but yes, you're right.
That's in it, so, mating
season is once a year right?
- Okay.
- But pairs only mate
once every five years.
- Okay, interesting, interesting.
So that's 1 1/2 pups every five years.
- That's right.
- Interesting, okay.
- And a swift fox will choose
like one mate for life really?
- Okay, okay, that's important as well.
- And their life expectancy is 10 years.
- Okay.
Okay, so all this stuff
will be extremely helpful
to help me calculate this.
But actually, the first thing I need to do
is to figure out how many mating
pairs that are every year.
So I'm gonna go back to this table
and start putting some numbers to it.
- Before we jump into that,
just thinking back to
your original structure.
- Yeah.
- You had this migration question there.
- Where are you on that,
what is your thinking?
- Well, my thinking is that this,
just looking at this exhibit here,
migration might be a lot more limited,
given the highway
splitting these two groups.
- Yep.
- But you're right, that's a good push
that maybe it's something
that we're missing here
is let's bring that
back into this equation
and see if it's, impactful.
- No, I think I mean, I
actually think it's fair for you
to assume that there's
a zero there, right?
I just wanna make sure
that we're not losing
that in the equation,
because maybe we'll
come across some facts,
but based on what we understand so far,
there's nothing to worry about.
- Okay, great, great, great.
So I'm gonna leave that out of the formula
and we'll keep going on with this.
So let's first figure
out how many mating pairs
are out here.
So know that group A, B, C, D.
Group A, has quarter of the population,
our population is 5000.
- That's right.
- Right, so our population,
total population, there's 1250,
and then we care about
the limiting population
for mating pairs, which
is 10% of the males,
which means we can only have
125 mating pairs every year.
- Right, now I see what you're doing, yes,
that makes a lot of sense.
- Okay, great.
So let me just sum these all
up, and we'll keep going.
- Okay.
- So the next population is
group B eight of our population.
So that's gonna be 625, it's that right,
sorry about take this
six here 625 is correct,
and our limiting population
again, is the male 30% of this,
so that's about 100 and I'll call it 190,
is that okay with you if I.
- Yeah, that's fine.
- Okay.
- You can even go 200 works for me,
- Sure, let's do that make
my life a little bit easier.
- Well, okay.
- The next population is
three of this so 1875.
And well, populations evenly split
so we can have half that
number of mate pairs.
So that's 937.
So let's call 940.
- Sure.
- And our last group, group
D another quarter so 1250,
or limiting population is the males again,
which brings us to four times that is 500.
So this is the total
number of mating pairs
that we have per year.
- Yeah.
- And we can tie this
back into our formula
to get how many pups that
would be in a single year.
So 125, 200, so 325, eight
plus 500 would be 825
plus another 940 is 1765.
So that's how many mating
pairs we can have any year.
- Yeah.
- And let's bring it back
to our original formula
get another page this is
getting a little messy.
So we have 1765 mating pairs,
you said that there was
1 1/2 cubs per pair.
And they mate once every five years.
So this is over five.
- Right.
- So let me make my life
a little bit easier here
and I'll call it 1765
divided by times point three,
excuse me.
- Why are you doing that?
- 1.5 divided by five.
- Perfect, okay.
- Okay and then this
just means 30% of this
to mind if I round this to 1800.
- Yeah, that's fine.
- So that's 180 times three which is 300
plus another 240 so 540,
so that's how many pups
we can expect to be born every year.
Okay, so that's one side of our equation.
Now let's get the other
side, which is deaths.
So the first piece we
talked about was natural
and you gave me a piece of information
saying that life expectancy was 10 years.
Which is perfect.
So we know that we have our,
Oh, you know what I was just
about to skip a step here,
but I'm realizing that.
- We have that presented.
- We need to segment out these ones.
So let me go back here and
make sure I separate out
those affected by disease.
So let's go back to these percentage here,
I'll make this disease.
So 25% of our quarter, which was 1250.
So a quarter of 1250 would be about 400
excuse me 315 ish.
- So what do you try to do now,
you're trying to carve
out the effect of disease
on the birth population, is that right?
- No, I'm actually thinking about this
from the death perspective.
- Okay.
- So my assumption is that
those disease can still mate,
but the issue here is that those disease
have a shorter life expectancy,
or my guess is they have
a shorter life expectancy,
which is actually some
piece of information
that I haven't got from you yet.
So I'll probably ask you that now.
So, disease.
- Yes.
- Is there what's the impact
on their life expectancy or.
- Kills in a year?
- A year, okay.
So that's important.
So it's a good thing that
I was starting to do this
'cause you're gonna need
this information anyway.
So what I'm doing here is figure
out how many are diseased.
- Yep.
- To subtract from the whole population.
- 'cause they won't be affected
by this 10 year life expectancy.
- That's right.
- Like the remainder of
the un diseased population.
- That's right.
- So let me continue on with this,
so the next population is group B,
which is an 1/8 of 625
and is 40% are diseased.
Let's call it 63 again,
so 40 of those 240, 252
- Say 250 is fine.
- Okay, so 250 are diseased.
Group C, 1875 10% are diseased
that makes my life easy
Call it 188
And the last one is 5% of
this 1250 which means 125
60 to 62.5 make that
a little rounder only.
So let me just make it 62.
And it'll make my life easier.
- Yeah, sure.
- So this is 565
plus another 190 and 62.
So that's 815 is the
number that are diseased.
Okay, so that means
just from disease alone,
we're gonna be losing 850 per year,
815 per year.
Let's start this sum here so births,
Just I'll call this natural, diseased.
- That's good.
So bursary of 540.
- Yeah.
- Diseased we have 815
which is quite meaningful
and natural, we have the
remainder of this 5000
less 815, which is 4190
excuse me 4185
and 10 year life expectancy.
So that means assuming that
it's an even population distribution
- Right, that's fair
- That we're gonna lose about
420 of those every year.
So let's bring this all together here.
So what we're doing here is just something
the rest is to see our
population changing.
So 540 births less 420 natural deaths
reduced to 120 minus another 815,
which would be around 20.
So that would be seven, 695 isn't it?
695 and that's a negative
population decline every year.
- Yes.
- So what this is telling
me is that on our 5000
we're losing 695 a year.
- Yeah.
- That's 700 that's about
14% of our entire population
in just a single year.
But more importantly, is that
we're having more diseased related deaths,
than we have births,
and actually did births
could cover natural deaths
if we if disease didn't exist.
- Right.
- And we'd actually be
recovering a little bit right?
- Right.
- So for my next step would be to look at
the causes of this disease
and if any cures exists out there
that we could look at
and start thinking about
how we can implement these cures to try
and reduce the number of disease.
But on the other side, we
could also look at boosting
the number of births right?
Because we saw before that
there's a gender imbalance.
There might be an
opportunity to either try
and rebalance the population
between these groups
by physically moving them around,
or potentially introducing
other blocks population
from that are bred outside
of this environment,
just to try and boost
the birth numbers to try
and, you know, maybe grow the
population a little quicker.
Yeah, so that's the way
I would think about this.
- Okay, now let's talk
about the number stuff
the math stuff.
Another top notch answer
from Scott, right?
His approach is high level
calculations are confident
and error free.
He's not making any mistakes as you go
that's fantastic.
At the end, and perhaps
most important to this right
in the math, don't forget this.
At the end, he shared the far
reaching implications of his answer.
He didn't just leave it
sit there as a number
but thought about what does
this mean for the case,
he went way back to the case prompt.
What does this mean for
the case as a whole?
I know you wanna hear about improvements.
And if I'm being picky,
here's a couple right?
Scott could have perhaps structured
his second level calculations
as well as his first
and communicated those in advance,
for example, explaining how he
would have calculated deaths
before actually calculating them.
He did this as he went right,
he sort of rolled along with it.
But sometimes it's useful to
give me the equation beforehand
so I can see where it is you're going,
perhaps I can correct
you or things like this.
Scott, almost missed, right,
almost forgot to take
diseases into account
in that calculation caught
himself, so no harm done.
But by explaining it ahead of time,
you're more likely to give yourself
a chance to catch those
mistakes before you make them.
But overall, another
great answer from Scott.
Are there any further
analysis you'd wanna do?
Is there anything more
you'd wanna look at,
if you had a little bit
more time on the project?
- I mean, absolutely, the
biggest element is the disease
we talked about just briefly right now.
But all we know about it right now
is that it's gastrointestinal?
So I'd be really interested to look at,
if there are other populations
that have been affected by this disease,
and if they were able to eradicate it,
just to really identify what we could
potentially be doing for this foxes.
But that's just on one side of it.
The other pieces on the births,
which we just talked about
a little bit more detail right now.
So, I mean, there is a lot more analysis
I'd like to do on that.
- Yeah.
- But yeah, that's where I
sort of wanna take this next.
- Maybe there's also like
a general benchmarking
against with fox populations
in other countries it's right.
- Oh it's a good point.
- Maybe I don't know what
the comparable countries
what comparable countries
do you think there would be?
- With swift foxes?
I guess for Canadian Wildlife Federation,
so my instinct is to think, you know,
an environment that looks the same,
something like the US might have parks
with similar swift fox populations,
maybe some European countries,
something like that.
But that's just looking
directly at swift fox.
So it might be interesting
also, to look at populations
of other species may be similar maybe not,
that were affected by a similar disease,
just to see if they were able
to correct the situation,
and if so how?
Just to give us some ideas.
- Cool, and as you're doing
this, this analysis, actually,
the turns out that the chairman
of the Canadian Wildlife Federation
has an upcoming public statement.
- Oh, well.
- I'd like to include
a few pieces of insight
that you've generated
from the work you've done
to update the local communities
and the plans to save the swift fox.
- Okay, great.
- She's asked you to provide a sort of
a 30 second synopsis of your key findings.
- Okay.
- So that she can share those
in her public statement.
What would you suggest that she say?
- Okay, great, well, first thing
we set out just to identify
what the cause of this was.
And what we found is
that it's a combination
of too few births, and too
many deaths related to disease.
So my recommendations are two things.
First, is to investigate
the causes of these disease
and search for solutions
of how to correct it
in the long run.
And the second is to look
at means of increasing
the number of births, we saw that births
are actually about 250 less than
the number of disease related deaths
and we'll never be able
to recover the population
in this manner.
So my next steps are investigating further
the root causes of these diseases.
Potential cures, potential
implementation plans
of how we could roll out this cure.
And the second piece would
be related to the births.
To investigate further,
how you can potentially
rebalance the gender imbalance
that exists in this environment right now.
- All right, so Scott
just wrapped up the case.
And overall very, very strong
all the way through the end
a couple of little places
for improvement here.
The good, he stated the
two main root causes
of the population decline,
and later clear ways
to address these right.
He's very much focused on
the answer to the case.
In terms of improvement,
while he missed the sharing
that the swift fox population
is expected to decline
a further 14% this year,
which was his top finding,
and perhaps missed the insight
about the gender imbalance
until the end of his conclusion, right?
Could have presented that
a little bit earlier on.
These are tweaks, they're
not huge things at the end
of a very strong case, not a big deal.
Scott throughout stands out here
in terms of his case leadership.
He had a clear view throughout
about how to solve the problem.
I felt in good hands,
I felt that he had a
command of the interview.
He connected every insight
back up to the question at hand, right?
Back up to the overall brief of the case.
He had specific suggestions
about next steps.
And really one of the
best that I've ever seen
in terms of that dimension
in terms of that kind of
taking it to the not just
what's happening, but what
should we do about it level.
His presence of communication
are both excellent.
Scott is articulate and concise.
He understands the power of synthesis.
He's using the right words,
to express what he
wants to say efficiently
as he goes through.
He's confident and engaging.
He's not smiling too much,
but he's clearly enjoying what he's doing,
and his moving through the case and again,
owning that case process.
He's driving me through the case.
He'd be great with clients, right?
He's showing that client ability
those client hands are there.
To me, Scott's a clear hire no question
and a textbook example of
what a great case interview
can look like.
All right, well that's it for this case.
Thank you very much for watching.
I hope that you enjoyed it,
I hope that you found it useful.
If you did, why not give a little click
on that like button down below
adding some comments, tell us what you think
There's lots more videos to check out
on our platform
www.casecoach.com
but also here on our Youtube channel
Enjoy and good luck with your practice.